Phase 5: Update Documentation (#177)
Ekumen-OS/lambkin: src/lambkin/README.md

Reviewer: Is this really true in a containerized environment? I think it is delegated to the cgroup root not the suer service.

Author: Solved in 6109484

Reviewer: Because the current section only explains the mechanical cgroup-kill side of Ctrl-C, not the consequence that actually matters to someone writing a benchmark function: their script's process never receives SIGINT at all, since the CLI deliberately launches it in its own session to shield it. That's a real gap — someone could write a try/except KeyboardInterrupt expecting it to run cleanup logic on interrupt, and it would silently never fire, with nothing in the docs to explain why.

I suggest you add sth this to the existing paragraph on process cleanup: " Your benchmark function's process never receives SIGINT directly — only the CLI's own session does."

Author: Solved in 3160a9b

The LAMBKIN Python SDK is the core library for building SLAM evaluation pipelines. It provides the orchestration primitives you compose into your benchmark: process lifecycle management, parameter sweep execution, pipeline stages, and structured I/O.

## Table of Contents

- [Architecture](#architecture)
- [Core Concepts](#core-concepts)
- [Process Management with cgroups v2](#process-management-with-cgroups-v2)
- [CLI](#cli)
- [Partial Restarts](#partial-restarts)
- [Logging](#logging)
- [Results](#results)
- [Expected Output](#expected-output)

## Architecture

> A benchmark is structured around three stages that LAMBKIN sequences and keeps organized:

Reviewer: Revert two word choices: 
- Setup/Execution/Result access → Ingestion/Execution/Egression (matches the design doc, and "ingestion" covers this cleanly — resolving any dependency, whether it's a dataset file or a generated seed, is still pulling a value in from outside the calling code).
-  "three moments" → "three stages" (the very next sentence already says "Each stage is a plain Python function," so it's currently inconsistent with itself).

Author: Solved in e2d8d1f

Each level is a context manager: entering it creates the corresponding output directory on disk, and exiting it tears down anything it owns — the iteration's cgroup, in the innermost case. `ctx.inputs` is read-only once resolved; assigning to it a second time raises `AttributeError`.

### Source

Describes the benchmark script being executed. Exposed through the context as `ctx.source`, it gives benchmark stages access to the script's own location (`ctx.source.path`) without hardcoding paths.

### Input

Registers a data resolution hook on a benchmark function. Each hook must be a callable that accepts a single `Context` object as its argument and must return a non-empty value. Hook names must be unique across the entire benchmark — registering two hooks with the same name, even under different scopes, raises an error. Can be used as a decorator via `@input`.

Hooks can be scoped to one of three lifecycle levels via `scope=`:

> - `"benchmark"` (default) — resolved once before the variant loop. Use for inputs that don't depend on the current variant or iteration, e.g. a shared dataset.

Reviewer: Nit: better say a single dataset for the entire benchmark. shared does not read that natural to me.

Author: Solved in 4eb3218

> - `"variant"` — resolved once per variant. Use for inputs that depend on `ctx.variant` but not `ctx.iteration`, e.g. selecting a dataset file by sensor model.

Reviewer: Selecting a dataset per sensor model does not seem a very clear example. Rephrase to selecting a dataset registered as a variant

Author: Solved in 4eb3218

### Option

Registers a CLI option on a benchmark. Built on top of [`click`](https://click.palletsprojects.com/en/stable/options/), so any attribute supported by `click.Option` can be passed. Flag names must start with `-` or `--`. Declared options are collected and parsed once before the execution loop, and their values made available through the context. Can be used as a decorator via `@option`.

### Shell

Abstracts shell command dispatch. Exposes the host environment's executables as Python attributes — accessing `shell.my_tool` returns a callable that runs `my_tool` with the given arguments, letting benchmark scripts invoke external processes without hardcoding paths or constructing subprocess calls manually. Accessible through the context.

### Background Process

Runs a process in the background while the benchmark continues executing. Takes a shell command (without calling it) and manages its full lifecycle — start, monitor, and clean up — as a context manager. When the context exits, it terminates the process and all its descendants; any process spawned outside a `background()` block is not covered.

> 

Reviewer: Explain that we interrupt the benchmark when we detect a failed background process. For example:

"If the background process dies unexpectedly before the context exits, any foreground call currently blocked waiting on it is unblocked immediately instead of hanging, and the iteration fails with `LambkinProcessDiedUnexpectedlyError`."

Author: Solved in 0451503

Each stage is a plain Python function that receives a context object carrying configuration, paths, and state. You implement the logic; LAMBKIN handles the rest.

## Expected Output

LAMBKIN writes all artifacts under a consistent directory tree:

```bash
results/
├── variants.yaml
└── <variant_n>/
    └── iter_<n>/
        ├── lambkin_metadata.yaml
        ├── output.mcap
        ├── out.zip
        ├── my_algorithm.stdout.log
        ├── my_algorithm.stderr.log
        ├── my_recorder.stdout.log
        └── my_recorder.stderr.log
```

`lambkin_metadata.yaml` is always written by the SDK itself. Everything else under `iter_<n>/` is whatever your benchmark function's commands wrote to the current working directory — the exact names and shapes depend entirely on the tools you call (e.g. `ros2 bag record -o output` creates an `output/` *directory* with its own internal files, not a single `output.mcap`). Artifacts written by `@output` hooks are not placed anywhere automatically — it's up to the hook to decide where to write them (e.g. `ctx.base_dir / "plots.png"` to put them under `results/`).

> [!NOTE]

> > Two simultaneous `lambkin` invocations against the same `results/` directory are not guarded against — there is no file locking, so concurrent runs may corrupt each other's output. To run two benchmarks in parallel, place them in separate source directories or rename the existing `results/` folder first.

Reviewer: Simplify the note — "in parallel" implied a supported, deliberate use case, when it's really about avoiding an accidental collision. Also cut the mechanism explanation (how a second invocation gets fooled into rerunning); the instruction is what matters here, not the internals. Added "so the cache stays trustworthy and outputs don't get corrupted" to keep the why without it.

```suggestion
> [!NOTE]
> Avoid running two benchmarks against the same `results/` directory at once — place them in separate source directories, or rename the existing `results/` folder first, so the cache stays trustworthy and outputs don't get corrupted.
```

Author: Solved in 6917903

> `results/` being tied to the benchmark script's location is a deliberate design choice: it means the cache always works without requiring the user to pass an explicit output path, and keeps each benchmark script bound to a fixed, reproducible setup.

Reviewer: Move the paragraph 

"`results/` being tied to the benchmark script's location is a deliberate design choice: it means the cache always works without requiring the user to pass an explicit output path, and keeps each benchmark script bound to a fixed, reproducible setup."

above the [!NOTE] please

Author: Solved in 6917903

  --no-cache       Bypass the partial restart cache and force a full rerun of
                   all iterations, regardless of prior completion.

Custom Options (script-defined):
  Options registered in your benchmark script via @lambkin.option.
  Run 'lambkin SCRIPT --show-options' to list them.
```

> [!WARNING]
> The SDK option names above are reserved. Declaring any of them via `@lambkin.option` in your script raises a Click error at parse time due to duplicate parameter names.

`--show-options` and `--show-variants` behave like `--help`: they print information and exit immediately, never reaching the benchmark body.

### Selecting a subset of variants

Useful to retry a failed configuration, or to split a long sweep across machines.

```bash
# List every variant with its var_N number, without running anything.
lambkin my_benchmark.py --show-variants

# Run only variants 1, 3, 4 and 5.
lambkin my_benchmark.py --variants 1,3:5
```

Variant numbers always refer to the full, original sweep — they don't shift when you select a subset, so the output folder for a given configuration (`var_N`) stays stable across runs.

> ## Partial Restarts

Reviewer: I think this section is a bit too descriptive and we should aim at simplifying and go straight to the point.

Suggestion (pass no cache part is fine):

LAMBKIN supports partial restarts by writing a metadata file to each iteration's own output folder. It records whether the iteration completed, along with a hash encoding the variant's parameters, the iteration index, and any custom options you've declared — SDK flags like `--log-level` are excluded, since they don't affect what the benchmark actually produces.

> [!WARNING]
> Currently the hash doesn't account for changes to the benchmark function's own source code, or to the contents of a file an input hook resolves (e.g. swapping in a different dataset without changing any variant or option). Edit either of those and the cache will still report a hit.

On the next run, before touching anything, LAMBKIN checks each iteration's metadata against the current hash: a match with a recorded completion means it's safe to skip; a mismatch — because a parameter or option changed — or no completion at all means it reruns. That's what lets an interrupted hundred-run sweep resume exactly where it left off, and lets changing one parameter invalidate only the iterations it actually affects.

Pass `--no-cache` to bypass this check entirely and force a full rerun of every iteration, regardless of prior completion.

Author: Solved in 7c3fda6

`run_hash` is derived from the variant parameters, the iteration index, and the script's custom options. SDK-level flags (`--log-level`, `--dry-run`, and similarly inconsequential ones) are excluded, since they don't affect benchmark outputs. Changing any variant parameter or custom option invalidates only the affected iterations' hashes — and therefore only reruns those — leaving everything else alone.

Pass `--no-cache` to bypass this check entirely and force a full rerun of every iteration, regardless of prior completion.

> [!NOTE]

> > Iterations run with `--dry-run` still write the initial `lambkin_metadata.yaml`, but never get `completed_at` — dry-run iterations don't do real work, so they're never considered complete. Re-running a dry-run script will show no cache hits every time, and will keep overwriting the same incomplete metadata file — that's expected, not a bug.

Reviewer: Better simplify
```suggestion
> [!NOTE]
> Dry runs write the initial metadata but never get `completed_at`, so they always show as cache misses — that's expected, not a bug.
```

Author: Solved in 8929c18

        └── my_recorder-e3f4a5b6/        ← ros2 bag record process
```

> When running on the host, a user systemd app slice (app.slice) is always available. In containerized environments no app slice may exist — in that case, LAMBKIN falls back to the nearest delegated cgroup it can find. For example, under Podman with s`--systemd=always`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When running on the host, a user systemd app slice (app.slice) is always available. In containerized environments no app slice may exist — in that case, LAMBKIN falls back to the nearest delegated cgroup it can find. For example, under Podman with `--systemd=always`:
```

Author: Solved in d66ea4d

lambkin my_benchmark.py --log-level DEBUG  # equivalent
```

> The LAMBKIN logger is fully isolated from the root logger — user scripts can configure their own logging without any interference. `configure_logging` attaches a dedicated `StreamHandler` to the `"lambkin"` logger and sets `propagate = False`, so its messages never reach the root logger or any handler your script may have configured there. Most scripts don't need to touch this.

Reviewer: On SDK Logging:

- The propagate example doesn't work on its own, and that's not obvious from how it's written. Setting `logging.getLogger("lambkin").propagate = True` only does something if there's already a handler configured on the root logger — and LAMBKIN deliberately never configures root itself (confirmed in `configure_logging`, it only ever touches `"lambkin"`). As written, a reader copying just that one line gets a no-op, since propagation just hands the record to an empty root logger with nothing listening. Either show the full pairing (e.g. `logging.basicConfig(...)` alongside the `propagate = True` line) or say explicitly that this only matters if you're already configuring root yourself.

- Missing the simpler option. If someone just wants LAMBKIN's output to also go to a file, they don't need to touch propagation at all — attaching a handler directly to `"lambkin"` (`logging.getLogger("lambkin").addHandler(...)`) works regardless of propagate, since a logger's own handlers always run independent of that flag. Worth presenting that as the first/default option, with the propagate route as the secondary one for folding LAMBKIN's output into an existing root-level setup specifically.

Author: Solved in 1b29b12

2. **Per-call** — `log_output` keyword at the call site
3. **ShellProxy default** — `ShellProxy(log_output="file")`

> ## Results

Reviewer: Missing a `### Metrics` section within results. Sth like:

LAMBKIN doesn't compute trajectory metrics itself — it invokes evo through ctx.shell, the same way it invokes any other process, and reads back whatever evo writes. The field names exposed below are evo's own, not LAMBKIN's.

Maybe mention the general use cases like APE and RPE and bind the official evo docu.

Author: Solved in 6600e97

`lambkin.data` provides structured access to whatever a benchmark already wrote to disk:

- **`lambkin.data.access.iterations(source)`** — walks `results/var_*/iter_*/`, skips any iteration that didn't complete, and returns one entry per completed iteration with `iter_dir`, `variant` (e.g. `"var_1"`), `iteration`, and `params` (the variant's parameters as a `SimpleNamespace`). Accepts either a context-like object exposing `.base_dir`, or a plain path/string.
- **`lambkin.data.evo.series(source, filename)`** — same traversal, plus loads the `evo` result file (e.g. `"output.ape.zip"`) from each iteration directory and exposes `time`, `error`, and `distance` arrays, ready to plot.
- **`lambkin.data.evo.stats(source, filename)`** — same traversal, but exposes the aggregate statistics `evo` computes for each result: `rmse`, `mean`, `median`, `std`, `min`, `max`, `sse`.

### Output Hooks

> `@my_benchmark.output` hooks run once, after the entire benchmark loop finishes, against the full results tree — the natural place to call `lambkin.data` and turn it into plots or logged statistics:

Reviewer: Trim the opening line of the Results > Output Hooks section — it restates "runs once, after the entire benchmark loop completes," which is already covered by the Output entry in Core Concepts

Author: Solved in b53dfa0

```python
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
import lambkin

@my_benchmark.output
def plots(ctx):
    for entry in lambkin.data.evo.series(ctx, "output.ape.zip"):
        plt.plot(
            entry.time, entry.error, label=f"{entry.variant} / iter {entry.iteration}"
        )
    plt.xlabel("Time (s)")
    plt.ylabel("Error (m)")
    plt.legend()
    plt.savefig(ctx.base_dir / "plots.png")

@my_benchmark.output
def stats(ctx):
    for entry in lambkin.data.evo.stats(ctx, "output.ape.zip"):
        lambkin.logger.info(
            "%s iter %d: rmse=%.4f mean=%.4f max=%.4f",
            entry.variant,
            entry.iteration,
            entry.rmse,
            entry.mean,
            entry.max,
        )
```

### Reprocessing

None of `lambkin.data`'s functions need a live benchmark — `access.iterations()`, `evo.series()`, and `evo.stats()` accept a plain path just as well as a context. That means a `results/` directory can be revisited later, from a notebook or a standalone script, and reprocessed into a different plot or report without re-running anything:

```python
import lambkin

def reprocess():
    for it in lambkin.data.access.iterations(

>         "/home/xaru/ekumen/lambkin/examples/beluga/results"

Reviewer: No need to refer a path from my computer 😆 Use a generic "/path/to/results" please

Author: Solved

    ):
        sh = lambkin.ShellProxy(
            dry_run=False,
            cwd=it.iter_dir,
            cgroup=None,
            log_output="console",
        )
        sh.evo_ape.bag2(
            "output",
            "/ground_truth",
            "/pose",
            "--save_results",
            "output2.ape.zip",
        )

if __name__ == "__main__":
    reprocess()
```

> This is the same code as in an `@output` hook, just pointed at a path string instead of `ctx`. Useful for generating a new report from an old run, comparing two separate `results/` directories, or trying out a plot before committing it to the benchmark script itself.

Reviewer: Also mention the problem with logging here (while reprocessing). We are not tracking call counts (no need to explain this) so if we run a process in file log mode with the same process, the log file will be overwritten. So we live with that or set log to console. Also, cgroups need to be None as only context manages its lifecycle so not sage to assign a crgoup here.

Author: Solved in aeeb06d

> ## Expected Output

Reviewer: Mention that two lambkin invocations against the same `results/` directory aren't guarded against. So either remove or rename the folder, or place the benchmark in a different folder.

It is a design choice to have reproducible access. If the user could set any path in the results folder we would likely loose cache access if the user forgets to set the same output. And also benchmark scripts should be kind of linked to a given static setup.

Author: Solved in 7903729

Reviewer: I think this has been tackled in the wrong section @teresa-ortega. Seems like the preview can be a bit confusing. This was a comment for the expected output section!

Author: Sorry, solved in 3363e0c
